*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 56199 ***

                       DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                        Douglas McKay, Secretary

                      UNITED STATES INDIAN SERVICE
                      Glenn L. Emmons, Commissioner

                           BRANCH OF EDUCATION
                        Hildegard Thompson, Chief

                       Single Copy Price 15 cents

        Printing Department [Illustration] Phoenix Indian School
                            Phoenix, Arizona

                Second edition 5,000 copies—February 1956




                      NAVAJO NEW WORLD READERS · 1

                             AWAY TO SCHOOL

                                ’ÓLTA’GÓÓ

                             [Illustration]

                            by CECIL S. KING

                            _Navajo Text by_
                             RAMONA M. SMITH

                            _Illustrated by_
                              FRANKLIN KAHN

                      UNITED STATES INDIAN SERVICE




NAVAJO NEW WORLD READERS


At this writing (1951) there are approximately 26,000 children of school
age on the Navajo reservation. About 40 percent of these are between the
ages of 12 and 18. The great majority have never been inside a school,
and do not speak English. Recently the government has provided space
for more than 4,000 of these non-English-speaking adolescents in ten of
its off-reservation boarding schools. A five-year intensive educational
program is provided designed to teach these children to speak, read,
write, and think in English; to do simple arithmetic, to know the facts
of American history, world geography, civics and health; and to provide
the basic skills which will enable them to obtain and hold a permanent
job away from the reservation. The reservation resources will support
only about half the present population.

We have learned how to teach these non-English-speaking Navajos to speak
and read English very rapidly. However, there isn’t much material for
them to read. They are maturing adolescents with adolescent interests.
Primers and first readers prepared for use by six-year-old public school
children don’t have much interest for them. Because most non-Indians
learn to read when they are young, very few books are published in which
the ideas are mature, but the vocabularies simple enough for beginning
readers. The Indian Service, therefore, has undertaken the preparation
and printing of a series of readers, written by the leaders who are
working directly with these children. Because the children are entering a
new culture, and their success will depend upon the degree to which they
make the basic ideas of this culture their own, these new books will rely
on the material of this new culture for their content. They are therefore
being grouped under the general title “Navajo New World Readers,” for
they will present to these young people a new and different world from
that through which they have grown during their early years on the
reservation.

                                               Willard W. Beatty
                                               Chief, Branch of Education

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I am a Navajo boy.

Shí Naabeehó ’ashkii nishłį́.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is my home.

Díidi shí shighan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I go to school.

I go to my school on a bus.

Shí ’ííníshta’.

Shí ’ólta’góó chidíłgaaí bee ’ałnánáshdááh.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I go to my school in the fall.

My school is far from my home.

Shí ’aak’eego ’ólta’góó ’ałnánáshdááh.

Shighan dóó doo deighánígóó ’ííníshta’.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I live at my school.

I open my window when I sleep.

Shi ’ólta’di shighan.

Shi tsésǫ’ dei ’át’éego ná’iishwosh.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is my room.

I clean my room.

Kónéé shighan.

Shighan góne’ hasht’e hwíínísin.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is my locker.

I put my clean clothes in my locker.

Díidí shi’éé’ biyi’ sinilí ’át’é.

Shi’éé’ chin bąąh ’ádaadínígíí kóne’ síłnił.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is the shower.

Díí kwii tó náálį́įgo biyaa tá’ádazdigis.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I take a bath in the shower.

I am clean.

Tó shik’ijį’ náálį́įgo tá’ánídísgis.

Chin shąąh ’ádin.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I wash my hair.

My hair is clean.

Shitsii’ tánínásgis.

Shitsii’ chin bąąh ’ádin.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I comb my hair.

Shitsii’ náshoh.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I wash my clothes.

My clothes are clean.

Shi’éé’ nídeisgis.

Shi’éé’ chin bąąh ’ádin.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I can iron.

I iron my clean clothes.

’Éé’ nídadiilkǫǫh bééhasin.

Shi’éé’ chin bąąh ’ádaadinígíí nínádadiishkǫǫh.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

These are my shoes.

I clean my shoes.

Díidí shikee’ ’át’é.

Shikee’ baa ’áháshyą́.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I go to the dining room.

’Áłchíní da’ayánígóó ’ałnánáshdááh.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I eat breakfast.

I eat dinner.

I eat supper.

’Ahbínígo ná’áshdį́į́h.

’Ałné’é’áahgo ná’áshdį́į́h.

’E’e’áahgo ná’áshdį́į́h.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I eat bread and butter.

I eat cereal.

I like cereal.

Shí bááh doo mandagíiya náshdííh.

Shí ch’il bílástsii’ dahólónígíí náshdį́į́h.

Ch’il bílástsii’ dahólónígíí shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I eat eggs.

I eat meat.

I like eggs and meat.

Shí ’ayęęzhii náshdį́į́h.

Shí ’atsį’ náshdį́į́h.

’Ayęęzhii dóó ’atsį shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Apples are good.

I like apples.

Bilasáana náshdį́į́h.

Bilasáana shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is fruit.

I like fruit.

Díidí tsin bineest’ą’ ’át’é.

Tsin bineest’ą’ shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

These are carrots.

I eat carrots.

Díidí chąąsht’ezhiitsoh ’át’é.

Shí chąąsht’ezhiitsoh náshdį́į́h.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

These are vegetables.

I like vegetables.

Díidí ch’il daadánígíí ’át’é.

Shí ch’il daadánígíí shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I drink orange juice.

Orange juice is good.

Shí ch’il łitsooí bitoo’ náshdlį́į́h.

Ch’il łitsooí bitoo’ shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I drink milk every day.

I like milk.

T’áá ’ákwííjį́ ’abe’ yishdlą́.

’Abe’ ’ayóogo shił łikan.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I brush my teeth every day.

My teeth are clean.

T’áá ’ákwííjį́ shiwoo’ tánínásgis.

Shiwoo’ chin bąąh ’ádin.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I play outdoors.

I am happy.

Shí tł’óo’di naashnée łeh.

Shí shił hózhǫ́.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

This is the nurse.

The nurse is my friend.

She helps me keep well.

Díidí ’asdzání ázee’ ’ííł’íní ’át’é.

Asdzáán ’azee’ ’ííłíní sik’is.

Asdzáán ’azee ’ííłini shitah yá’áhoot’ééh áhósín.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I weigh one hundred pounds.

I grow.

Neeznádíín dah hidíníshdlo’.

Neesééł.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I study my lessons.

I learn many things.

Bilagáanaa bizaad bíhoosh’aah.

T’óó ’ahayóí ’ałtah ’ádaat’éego bíhoosh’aah.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I will go home in the spring.

I will tell my people about my school.

Ch’éénídaango shighangóó nikéédeeshdááł.

Shighandi nánísdzáago shidine’é shi’ólta’ bee bił hashné doo.




INDIAN LIFE READERS

Navajo Series

Bilingual in Navajo and English


=LITTLE MAN’S FAMILY series by J. B. Enochs= illustrated by Gerald Nailor

    Pre-primer, primer, reader


=NAVAJO LIFE READERS by Hildegard Thompson= illustrated by Van
Tsihnahjinnie

    Pre-primer, primer, reader (Coyote Tales)


=NAVAJO NEW WORLD READERS=

(Material of mature concept and simple vocabulary for use by recently
non-English-speaking adolescents)

    =AWAY TO SCHOOL by Cecil S. King= illustrated by Franklin Kahn

    =THE FLAG OF MY COUNTRY by Cecil S. King= illustrated by Henry
    Bahe

    Other Titles in Preparation


=LITTLE NAVAJO HERDER SERIES by Ann Clark= illustrated by Hoke Denetsosie

    =LITTLE HERDER IN AUTUMN, IN WINTER=

    =LITTLE HERDER IN SPRING, IN SUMMER=


=NAVAJO HISTORICAL SERIES by Robert W. Young=

    =THE RAMAH NAVAJO=

    =THE TROUBLE AT ROUND ROCK=


=PERIODICALS=

=THE SHERMAN BULLETIN (in English)=

    A monthly magazine for recently non-English-speaking adolescents

=ADAHOONIŁIGII (Happenings)=

    A monthly newspaper in Navajo with summaries in English

       *       *       *       *       *

    for catalog and price list write to
    HASKELL INSTITUTE
    Lawrence, Kansas





End of Project Gutenberg's Away to school: 'Ólta'góó, by Cecil S. King

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 56199 ***
